FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Media Contact: Free Software Foundation
               Bradley M. Kuhn <pr@gnu.org>
               Phone: +1-617-542-5942

GNU Compiler Collection Version 3.0 Is Released;
Includes Support for Java and IA-64


Boston, Massachusetts, USA - Monday, June 18, 2001 - The Free Software
Foundation announced today the 3.0 release of the GNU Compiler Collection
(GCC).  GCC is a Free (as in freedom) Software compiler toolset, licensed
under the GNU General Public License (GPL).

This version of GCC fully incorporates a native-code compiler for the Java
programming language.  This allows Java programs that run faster, while
using a completely Free Software system without depending on a proprietary
Java compiler.

GCC 3.0 includes rewritten support the Intel and AMD 32-bit family of
processors, which includes all Pentium systems.  GCC 3.0 now generates
much better output for these processors.  This allows programs to run
faster on such systems.

GCC 3.0 supports the Intel IA-64 processor.  This support will allow
completely Free Software systems to run on the IA-64 architecture
immediately upon the public release of IA-64.  GCC 3.0 also supports other
new chipsets from Motorola, Atmel, Mitsubishi, Fujitsu and Sun.

GCC 3.0 vastly improves C++ support.  Many bug fixes and changes to the
C++ support library allow GCC 3.0 to conform better to ISO C++ standards
than ever before.  Also included is a new Application Binary Interface
(ABI) for C++.

But, technological considerations are not the most important reasons for
using GCC.  Richard M. Stallman, president of the Free Software
Foundation, pointed out: "Many users choose GCC for technical advantages,
such as having one compiler that works on many systems, or its powerful C
extensions.  But the most important benefit of GCC is freedom--your
freedom.  A free operating system requires a free compiler.  GCC was an
essential step on the road to freedom."

GCC 3.0 has benefitted from the efforts of several successful businesses
built around support and development of Free Software.  GCC, which is Free
Software licensed under the GPL, has facilitated sustainable business
models.  Some of these companies are listed in the Free Software
Foundation's service directory, which can be found at:
     http://www.gnu.org/prep/service.html

More information about the new features of GCC 3.0 can be found at:
     http://www.gnu.org/software/gcc/gcc-3.0/features.html

The software can be downloaded from:
     http://www.gnu.org/software/gcc/releases.html

Users are encouraged to use mirror sites for downloads, to decrease the
load on GNU and FSF servers.


About the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC):

The GNU Compiler Collection (GCC), originally called the GNU C Compiler,
includes compilers for the C, C++, Objective C, Fortran, and Java
languages.  Originally developed by Richard M. Stallman, GCC is now
developed and improved by a worldwide network of volunteers, lead by the
GCC Steering Committee, the official maintainers of GCC.  The GCC website
can be found at:
    http://www.gnu.org/software/gcc/gcc.html


About GNU:

GNU is a Free Software Unix-like operating system.  Development of GNU
began in 1984.  GCC is the compiler for the GNU system.

GNU/Linux is the integrated combination of the GNU operating system with
the kernel, Linux, written by Linus Torvalds in 1991.  The various
versions of GNU/Linux have an estimated 20 million users.

Some people call the GNU/Linux system "Linux", but this misnomer leads to
confusion (people cannot tell whether you mean the whole system or the
kernel, one part), and spreads an inaccurate picture of how, when and
where the system was developed.  Making a consistent distinction between
GNU/Linux, the whole operating system, and Linux, the kernel, is the best
way to clear up the confusion.


About the Free Software Foundation:

The Free Software Foundation, founded in 1985, is dedicated to promoting
computer users' right to use, study, copy, modify, and redistribute
computer programs.  The FSF promotes the development and use of free (as
in freedom) software---particularly the GNU operating system and its
GNU/Linux variants---and free documentation for free software.  The FSF
also helps to spread awareness of the ethical and political issues of
freedom in the use of software.  Their web site, located at
http://www.gnu.org, is an important source of information about GNU/Linux.
They are headquartered in Boston, MA, USA.
