\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename patent-examples.info
@settitle Software patents that hurt free software

@node Top, Original Announcement, (dir), (dir)
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@top Examples of Software Patents that hurt Free Software

@menu
* Original Announcement::       
* Audio/Video::                 
* Graphics::                    
* Speech Synthesis::            
* Fonts::                       
* Text Processor::              
* Compression::                 
* Web server::                  
* Compilers::                   
* Programming::                 
* Drivers::                     
* Communication Protocols::     

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Audio/Video

* RealNetworks::                
* BladeEnc::                    
* Ogg Vorbis::                  
* Virtual Dub::                 
* Broadcast 2000::              
* xanim::                       
* MPEGII::                      

Graphics

* GIF::                         
* GD Library::                  
* GNUstep::                     
* XOR graphics::                
* GIMP::                        

Speech Synthesis

* MBROLA::                      

Fonts

* FreeType::                    

Text Processor

* Ted::                         

Compression

* ncompress::                   
* bzip::                        
* zlib::                        

Web server

* Roxen::                       

Compilers

* GCC::                         

Programming

* HyperProf::                   
* OpenIPO::                     
* Virtual functions in C++::    
* CDDB/FreeDB::                 
* ElectricFence::               

Drivers

* CueCat::                      

Communication Protocols

* WAP::                         

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Original Announcement, Audio/Video, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Original Announcement

Richard Stallman <patent-examples@@gnu.org>

Date: Mon, 11 Dec 2000 10:00:08 -0700 (MST)

@quotation
[Please repost this widely wherever appropriate]

We would like to collect information about cases where free software
has been harmed by software patents--that is, cases where a free
program has been withdrawn from use or interfered with, or where a
feature was taken out or never written in the first place, because of
the danger of a patent.

We hope to use this information to argue against the system of
software patents, especially in Europe where the question has become
a live political issue (see @url{http://www.freepatents.org}).

If you know of such a case, please write to @email{patent-examples@@gnu.org}
and tell us what happened.

Ideally we would like to know the name of the program, its developer's
name and email address or other coordinates, what happened to the
program, and the patent number.  If you know those things, please
include them in your report.  But if you don't have all of that
information, please write anyway and tell us whatever you know.  For
instance, if you can tell us how to contact the program's developer,
we can probably get the rest of the information from the developer.
If you can tell us just the program's name, we may be able to find the
developer.  We may write back to you to try to get more details; even
leads for getting more details may be useful.

Please send your information to @email{patent-examples@@gnu.org} rather
than to me personally, so that we can collect the responses efficiently.
@end quotation

@node Audio/Video, Graphics, Original Announcement, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Audio/Video

Thomas Hudson @email{thudson@@tomy.net}

@quotation
Another area of constant problems is in audio development for
Linux. The relevant homepage is at:

http://www.linuxdj.com/audio/lad/index.php3

Check the archives of the mailing list. Almost every development runs
into another patent. For audio development it is literally getting to
the point of programmers having to do a patent search and find ways to
program around it. Paul Barton-Davis @email{pbd@@op.net} would be a good
contact for more info.  
@end quotation

@menu
* RealNetworks::                
* BladeEnc::                    
* Ogg Vorbis::                  
* Virtual Dub::                 
* Broadcast 2000::              
* xanim::                       
* MPEGII::                      
@end menu

@node RealNetworks, BladeEnc, Audio/Video, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section RealNetworks

Pam Dixon @email{pam@@pamdixon.com}

@quotation
- --I sent a message Sunday with the info; just in case it got jumbled in =
the ether, I'll repeat some of it here. I find the RealNetworks patent =
worse than most, given the factors involved. The patent is too broad, =
the language too loose, and coupled with Real's attitude and approach, =
the whole thing stinks.=20

The patent abstract is below -- unfortunately, the core patent documents =
don't get any better. You'll see right through the smoke screen they put =
up in the complete description of the so-called invention. Clearly, some =
attorney who didn't know much let this one through. ( =
http://www.uspto.gov/patft/index.html to get to the full patent text.)=20

You are probably already aware of this --some important patents =
regarding video compression are coming up, particularly relating to =
MPEG4; I've talked to the attorney who is the primary examiner on this =
patent cluster, and he actually rejected some of them last September =
(from major multinationals) based on over-breadth. It's wait-and-see. =
PacketVideo has just gotten an important patent on an error reduction =
algorithm relating to video compression in low-bandwidth situations that =
could have been applied very usefully, had it been freely distributed. =20


Snipped patent text:=20
- ----------------------
      United States Patent  6,151,634 =20
      Glaser ,   et al.  November 21, 2000 =20

Audio-on-demand communication system=20


Abstract
An audio-on-demand communication system provides real-time playback of =
audio data transferred via telephone lines or other communication links. =
One or more audio servers include memory banks which store compressed =
audio data. At the request of a user at a subscriber PC, an audio server =
transmits the compressed audio data over the communication link to the =
subscriber PC. The subscriber PC receives and decompresses the =
transmitted audio data in less than real-time using only the processing =
power of the CPU within the subscriber PC. According to one aspect of =
the present invention, high quality audio data compressed according to =
lossless compression techniques is transmitted together with normal =
quality audio data. According to another aspect of the present =
invention, metadata, or extra data, such as text, captions, still =
images, etc., is transmitted with audio data and is simultaneously =
displayed with corresponding audio data. The audio-on-demand system also =
provides a table of contents indicating significant divisions in the =
audio clip to be played and allows the user immediate access to audio =
data at the listed divisions. According to a further aspect of the =
present invention, servers and subscriber PCs are dynamically allocated =
based upon geographic location to provide the highest possible quality =
in the communication link.=20

      Inventors:  Glaser; Robert D. (Seattle, WA); O'Brien; Mark =
(Cambridge, MA); Boutell; Thomas B. (Seattle, WA); Goldberg; Randy Glen =
(Princeton, NJ) =20
      Assignee:  RealNetworks, Inc. (Seattle, WA) =20
      Appl. No.:  042172=20
      Filed:  March 13, 1998=20

      Current U.S. Class: 709/236; 370/476; 709/219; 709/231 =20
      Intern'l Class:  G06F 013/38; G06F 015/17=20
      Field of Search:  709/236,231,219,248 348/474 700/94 =
370/503,509,512,476 =20


- -------------------------------------------------------------------------=
- -------

References Cited [Referenced By]

- -------------------------------------------------------------------------=
- -------

U.S. Patent Documents
      4827256 May., 1989 Yokoyama.  =20
      5132992 Jul., 1992 Yurt et al..  =20
      5237322 Aug., 1993 Heberle.  =20
      5537409 Jul., 1996 Moriyama et al..  =20
      5719786 Feb., 1998 Nelson et al. 709/219. =20
      5758085 May., 1998 Kouoheris et al. 709/231. =20
      5793980 Aug., 1998 Glaser et al. 709/231. =20
      5915094 Jun., 1999 Kouloheris et al. 709/219. =20
      5917835 Jun., 1999 Barret et al..  =20



  Other References=20
      Govindan R; "Operating Systems Mechanisms for Continuous Media"; =
Thesis, University of California, Berkeley CA, 1992.=20
      Topolcic C et al.; "Experimental Internet Stream Protocol, Version =
2 (ST-II)"; RFC-1190; IETF Request for Comments, Oct. 1990.=20
      Schulzrinne H et al.; "Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)"; =
RFC-2326; IETF Request for Comments, Apr. 1998.=20
      Bigelow S J; "Modem Communications Standards"; Electronics Now; =
pp. 35-42, Sep. 1994. =20

Primary Examiner: Rinehart; Mark H.=20
Attorney, Agent or Firm: Knobbe, Martens, Olson & Bear, LLP=20
@end quotation

@node BladeEnc, Ogg Vorbis, RealNetworks, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section BladeEnc

Erkki Ruohtula @email{eru@@netti.fi}

@quotation
One free program with patent troubles is the BladeEnc MP3 encoder.  See
its homepage at @url{http://bladeenc.mp3.no} for the story, especially
the news section.  Althought theoretically the author (a Swede) should
be safe, he avoids distributing binaries himself due to complaints from
the Fraunhofer institute and the Thomson company.
@end quotation


Kyle Sparger @email{ksparger@@dialtoneinternet.net}

@quotation
Although the sourcecode for BladeEnc is distributed under the LGPL, it
includes algorithms and solutions that some of the
creators of the MPEG Layer 3 standard claims to have patents on. 

This makes portions of the BladeEnc sourcecode quite unsuitable for
inclusion into other software projects. It might even
be a breach of the GPL / LGPL license of another product if you add patent
covered parts of BladeEnc to its sourcecode."
@end quotation

Tord Jansson @email{tord.jansson@@swipnet.se}

@quotation
(Tord sent an email explaining with details how he was approached by
Fraunhofer/Thomson in regards of a violation of the MP3 related
technology)

European Patent numbers from the first round:

0378609
0277613
0309974
0193143
0414838
0251028

European Patent numbers from the second round:

0287578
0340301
0393526
0612156
0554290
0608281
0611516
0667063
0719483
0750811
0193143
0251028
0277613
0414838
0485390
0494990
0464534

@end quotation

@node Ogg Vorbis, Virtual Dub, BladeEnc, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Ogg Vorbis

Mike Coleman @email{mcoleman2@@kc.rr.com}

@quotation
The Ogg Vorbis sound format (a competitor to Fraunhofer's mp3) is
probably about to become an example.  Fraunhofer is already publicly
claiming that vorbis "probably" infringes on their patents, and since
they're sending cease-and-desist orders to everyone else, it looks like
it'll only be a matter of time.
@end quotation

"Terry Dube" @email{tdube@@sympatico.ca}

@quotation
@url{http://mp3licensing.com/patents.html} bragging about there software
patents.
@end quotation


@node Virtual Dub, Broadcast 2000, Ogg Vorbis, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Virtual Dub

MPEG-4 V3 format: Microsoft informed the author they held patents that
covered its use, and they wanted this format to only be used in their
ASF files, and also not to allow the format to be converted to other
formats.


"Ram'on Garc'ia Fern'andez" @email{ramon@@jl1.quim.ucm.es}

@quotation
Virtual Dub is a free (GPL) program for video edition and conversion.
The author had to remove support of ASF file format because Microsoft
threatened him of patent litigation.

Virtual Dub home page:

@url{http://www186.pair.com/vdub/}

The story:
@url{http://www.advogato.org/article/101.html}
@end quotation


Derrick Moser @email{d2moser@@engmail.uwaterloo.ca}

@quotation

I not sure about the details of what happened to Avery Lee but the
README.TXT for ASFRecorder says this:

Microsoft does claim a patent on the ASF file format in the United States
and  possibly  in  other  countries as well.  There has been at least one
succesful  attempt  to  reverse engineer the ASF format by a GNU software
author.   The  program I am talking about is VirtualDub 1.3 by Avery Lee.
By  threatening him with legal action, Microsoft has forced the author to
remove  support  for  loading  ASF  media  files  because of the programs
ability  to  transcode  these  media files to AVI format.
@end quotation


David Berglund @email{dberglund@@pol.net}

@quotation
Use of the MPEG-4 format would seem to be potentially a problem with
getting locked in, and unable to edit your own movies.  This would seem
to be even more of a problem with the introduction of digital cameras or
camcorders which record directly to the MPEG-4 format, such as the Sharp
VN-EZ1, billed as the World's First Internet Viewcam MPEG-4 Digital
Recorder.  There would appear to be no legitimate way to use such a
device with any free software operating system, since Microsoft controls
the format.  They do not give any "buyer beware" notices.

Information about the Sharp VN-EZ1: 
@url{http://www.sharp.co.jp/sc/gaiyou/news-e/990317.html}
@end quotation


@node Broadcast 2000, xanim, Virtual Dub, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Broadcast 2000

David Berglund @email{dberglund@@pol.net}

@quotation
The program Broadcast 2000, a non linear audio and video editor for 
Linux, apparently initially had some support for use of files from 
DVD.  However, there previously was a note on the web page asking for 
input on whether DVD support should be dropped, if it were to only be 
able to be in a binary.  I am not sure what the details were beyond 
this, but the earlier request for input is no longer present.  Similar 
issues related to other proprietary codec formats also would be of 
importance here, such as the MPEG-4 format, and also MP3 audio.  

The web address is:
@url{http://heroine.linuxave.net/bcast2000.html}

and the e-mail is:
@email{broadcast@@earthling.net}
@end quotation

@node xanim, MPEGII, Broadcast 2000, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section xanim

Mikael Hermansson @email{mikeh@@bahnhof.se}

@quotation
For example the most popular movie player for *nix is xanim It can't
support some of the codecs for quicktime(sorensen video codec)/avi(some
of intels/IBM)/mpeg4 because of those patents.

IMHO! this is bad because in the future people need to go back using
windows because the users can't look at movies on *nix platforms.

For more info about this look at @url{xanim.va.pubnix.com}
@end quotation

@node MPEGII,  , xanim, Audio/Video
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section MPEGII

Sengan @email{senganb@@ia.nsc.com}

@quotation
@url{http://www.mpegla.com/lic_agreement.html}

"There can't be any Free Software that encodes MPEG II without violating
this patent"
@end quotation


@node Graphics, Speech Synthesis, Audio/Video, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Graphics


@menu
* GIF::                         
* GD Library::                  
* GNUstep::                     
* XOR graphics::                
* GIMP::                        
@end menu

@node GIF, GD Library, Graphics, Graphics
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section GIF

Patents (Unisys and IBM) covering the LZW compression algorithm which is
used in making GIF files.


@node GD Library, GNUstep, GIF, Graphics
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section GD Library

Moshe Zadka @email{moshez@@zadka.site.co.il}

@quotation
I'm sure this tops the list, but the GD library does not support
GIF output any longer do to patent program (LZW).
@end quotation

pavlicek @email{pavlicek@@linuxstart.com}

@quotation

The homepage of the project is at:

@url{http://www.boutell.com/gd/}

@end quotation

Don Marti @email{dmarti@@zgp.org}

@quotation
Patent number:  4,558,302
@end quotation

@node GNUstep, XOR graphics, GD Library, Graphics
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section GNUstep

Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@doc.com}
Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@gnu.org}

@quotation
Attached is some text I wrote a few months ago that explains our
position. The only change is that recently Apple has changed their
interface somewhat which in effect makes parts of the entire GNUstep
system open to patent 'violation' (not just the EOF and WO parts).

GNUstep, The Basics:
----------

GNUstep, with regards to the current discussion, consists of three
major parts: The OpenStep system, Enterprise Objects Frameworks (EOF),
and WebObjects (WO). All three parts try to emulate interfaces
originally designed by Next Computer, Inc (Now Apple Computer,
Inc). All three parts use an Object-Oriented design and are primarily
written in the Objective-C language.

The OpenStep system consists of basic foundation classes
(dictionaries, arrays, etc) as well as GUI elements. While Apple
claims it has a copyright over this API, there are no
patents that we know of that affect the basic operation of this system
(In fact, large parts of the system were released as an "Open"
standard by Apple several years ago).

The EOF is designed to be an Object-Oriented interface to a
database. This is the interface that Apple has significant patent
claims on that we cannot work around without changing the interface in
a fundamental way (thereby making it incompatibile with Apple's EOF,
which ruins the stated goal of the GNUstep project). EOF depends
somewhat on the OpenStep system.

WO is designed to be an Object-Oriented method of creating and
maintaining dynamic web pages.  WO depends on EOF.

EOF:
----

Here is a basic description of EOF taken from the Apple
documentation. This discription actually alludes to Apple's patent
that is a key part of the EOF system.

    "Enterprise Objects Framework brings the benefits of
    object-oriented programming to database application
    development. You can use the Framework to build feature-rich,
    database applications with reusable software components that
    tightly couple business information with the business processes
    managing that information.

    One of the most significant problems developers face when using
    object-oriented programming languages with SQL databases is the
    difficulty of matching static, two-dimensional data structures
    with the extensive flexibility afforded by objects. The features
    of object-oriented programming-such as encapsulation and
    polymorphism-and their benefits-like fewer lines of code and
    greater code reusability-are often negated by the programming
    restrictions that come with accessing SQL databases within an
    object-oriented application.

    Enterprise Objects Framework solves this problem by providing
    tools for defining an object model and mapping it to a data
    model. This allows you to create objects that encapsulate both
    data and the methods for operating on that data, while taking
    advantage of the data access services provided by the Framework
    that make it possible for these objects to persist in a relational
    database."

Patents:
--------

The key patents that cover the implementation of EOF are:

US6085197 07/04/2000 Object graph editing context and methods of use
US5956728 09/21/1999 Object graph editing context and methods of use
US5873093 02/16/1999 Method and apparatus for mapping objects to a data source
US5898871 04/27/1999 Dynamic object communication protocol

URL: @url{http://www.patents.ibm.com/patlist?&like_assc=726196&issuedate_selected=CHECKED&title_selected=CHECKED&query=Assignee+=+NEXT%20SOFTWARE,%20INC.+(726196)&minisd=}

US5873093 involves the concept of Key-Value coding (i.e. storing
relationships between two entities via a dictionary-like listing of
keys and associated values). In EOF, that is how (dynamic) object models
are associated with (static) database tables.

US5898871 also involves Key-Value coding, but deals more specifically with
how to get information out of a database and present it in a uniform,
context-free way to an Object-Oriented program. For example, one
associates a database property ("FirstName") with an actual
value ("Joe") in the database and presents it in a dictionary as a
Key-Value pair. This applies to both EOF and WO.

US6085197 and US5956728 covers a system for managing changes to an
object-graph that includes also an undo stack.


Possible Prior Art:
-------------------

Rumbaugh, et al. "Object-Oriented Modeling and Design" published 1991,
chapter 17 deals with mapping object-oriented models to relational
databases.  The book stems from actual research and someone should be
able to turn up something like a lab note that even predates any
patent that contains the word "object".

Objectpeople's product TOPLink for Java and Smalltalk, introduced in 1991.

Relational Object Framework (company bought by IONA). There are
others, at www.object-relational.org, I believe.

A More Detail Analysis (from Stephen MacDougall):
-------------------------------------------------

    "From what I have read of the patent, my impression is that it
    only covers the creating of the EOModel, as evidenced by the first
    line in the abstract.  This states that, "The present invention
    creates a model that maps object classes in an object-oriented
    environment to a data source."  Thus, by interpreting the 20
    claims with this in mind, it becomes apparent that the patent is
    for the creation of the model itself.

    One can conclude from this that we can do every part of EOF except
    the EOModel, which creates the model in the first place.  We
    can even read a pre-existing EOModel and use it, as far as I can
    determine.  This would be similar to the LZW patent, in which you
    can freely create an LZW decoder, but creating an encoder would
    involve licensing to Unisys, as they hold the patent for the LZW
    encoding process.

    So, if we can find a way to create a completely separate and
    distinctively unique method to perform a *similar* function,
    without violating the patent, then we could go forward, and then
    just create a conversion program that would convert from an
    EOModel to a GDFMap type of construct. (GDF = GNU Database
    Framework, the current working name unless someone comes up with
    something better. "

@end quotation

@node XOR graphics, GIMP, GNUstep, Graphics
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section XOR graphics

Ingo Marks @email{ingo.marks@@t-online.de}

@quotation
someone holds a patent on XOR on graphics.

So you couldn't draw a selection frame with your mouse in Gimp
without violating this patent. You would have to "enjoy" flickering like
Sinclar ZX81 or enter the corner coordinates via keyboard.
@end quotation

@node GIMP,  , XOR graphics, Graphics
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section GIMP

Richard Stallman @email{rms@@gnu.org}

@quotation
The GIMP and other free software cannot support Pantone color
matching.  This makes it much harder for free software to do a good
job of generating images for printing.

The GIMP developers may be able to tell you what the patent number is.
@end quotation

@node Speech Synthesis, Fonts, Graphics, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Speech Synthesis

@menu
* MBROLA::                      
@end menu

@node MBROLA,  , Speech Synthesis, Speech Synthesis
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section MBROLA

The France Telecom patent was used to threaten MBROLA,
with the result that it was made non-free.


"Thierry Dutoit" @email{thierry.dutoit@@fpms.ac.be}

@quotation
France Telecom's patent on PSOLA (a well-known speech synthesis technique) : US 005327498

Our own patent on MBROLA : US 005987413

There is a third patent on similar thechniques, owned by Philips : EP 0527527 A2


This is the European version of the France Telecom patent: EP 363 233 (B1)

This is the Canadian patent: C 1 324 670
@end quotation



@node Fonts, Text Processor, Speech Synthesis, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Fonts

@menu
* FreeType::                    
@end menu

@node FreeType,  , Fonts, Fonts
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section FreeType

Thomas Hudson @email{thudson@@tomy.net}

@quotation
One such example is the FreeType Project (http://www.freetype.org).
Apple has several patents on the hinting mechanism of TrueType fonts.
Thus the freetype project had to implement a different mechanism.

More information can be found here:

http://freetype.sourceforge.net/patents.html
@end quotation

"Alexander Weber" @email{a.a.weber@@gmx.de}

@quotation
The Freetype font-rendering library is affected by a patent hold by
Apple describing an algorithm to speed up rendering

http://www.freetype.org/
http://www.freetype.org/patents.html
@end quotation

@node Text Processor, Compression, Fonts, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Text Processor


@menu
* Ted::                         
@end menu

@node Ted,  , Text Processor, Text Processor
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Ted

Mark de Does @email{M.de.Does@@inter.nl.net}

@quotation
Not only the HTML/GIF writing part of my easy rich text processor
'Ted', but many of the graphics projects I do suffer from the fact 
that writing GIF files is a problem.

I probably suffer more from the cowardice of Linux distributors 
that ship libungif under the name of libgif, than from the actual 
patent. As A European I prefer to ignore the LZW patent. The cowardly 
misrepresentation causes me headaches because the patent invites 
distributors to distribute a library that writes GIF files that only 
are GIF files formally.
@end quotation


@node Compression, Web server, Text Processor, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Compression

@menu
* ncompress::                   
* bzip::                        
* zlib::                        
@end menu

@node ncompress, bzip, Compression, Compression
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section ncompress

Moshe Zadka @email{moshez@@zadka.site.co.il}

@quotation
The "ncompress" program is very hard to find, and is not distributed in
many GNU/Linux distributions because it uses the patented LZW.
@end quotation

@node bzip, zlib, ncompress, Compression
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section bzip

Sengan @email{senganb@@ia.nsc.com}

@quotation
I think the original version of bzip was impeded in that the arithmetic
compression section was taken out.
@end quotation

Kyle Sparger @email{ksparger@@dialtoneinternet.net}

@quotation
"It also used arithmetic coding as the entropy encoder, but
this had to be changed to Huffman coding in bzip2 for patent reasons, it
seems." -- @url{http://www.kyz.uklinux.net/packers.php3#bzip2}
@end quotation

@node zlib,  , bzip, Compression
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section zlib

Patrick Goltzsch @email{Patrick.Goltzsch@@Hanse.de}

@quotation
I'll point you to Jean-loup Gailly <jloup@@gailly.net> who
wrote zlib. During my journalistic investigations on
software patents I came across his home page
(http://gailly.net/), where he describes his difficulties
with patents.  Actually a never published version of zlib
did violate a patent. He found out about it before
publication and changed it accordingly.

If he did not already answer himself, you should write him,
I'm sure he's very cooperative.

@end quotation

@node Web server, Compilers, Compression, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Web server

@menu
* Roxen::                       
@end menu

@node Roxen,  , Web server, Web server
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Roxen

Niels Möller @email{nisse@@lysator.liu.se}

@quotation
With the Roxen web-server, there were two well-known patents that
caused some trouble: The RSA patent (now expired) and the lzw "gif"
patents.

The consequences (that I know of) were limited distribution to the US.

I'm no longer working with Roxen, so for more information it is
probably better to mail @email{info@@roxen.com} than me.
@end quotation



@node Compilers, Programming, Web server, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Compilers

@menu
* GCC::                         
@end menu

@node GCC,  , Compilers, Compilers
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section GCC

Stefan Rieken @email{StefanRieken@@SoftHome.net}

@quotation
I heard telling that GCC suffers because there are a whole bunch of
optimization algorithms with patents. To find out more about that,
you'll have to check with GCC.
@end quotation

Sengan @email{senganb@@ia.nsc.com}

@quotation
There's the graph colouring algorithm used in register allocation in gcc
that had to be replaced by a multi-pass algorithm IIRC.
@end quotation

Francois PELLEGRINI @email{pelegrin@@labri.u-bordeaux.fr}

@quotation
I have been told that register coloring, although the best available
algorithm for register allocation in compilers, is not implemented in
GCC because of an IBM patent...
@end quotation

Ian Lance Taylor @email{ian@@airs.com}

@quotation
In early 1996, when I was employed by Cygnus Solutions, I spent about
a month working on gcc patches to do memory bounds checking.  I
patched gcc to generate a call to a bounds checker around every memory
access.  Array references to arrays of known size were handled by
inline checks which were constant folded when possible.  The compiler
used constructors to automatically register every static variable.
Different versions of malloc and free were used to register heap data
(I implemented the linker --wrap option to make this easily
controllable at link time).  It was possible to link code compiled
with checking with code compiled without checking.

The idea was to permit easy detection of memory access errors.  This
was based on the Purify product from Pure Software (now part of
Rational).  Their product was linker based.  This had the advantage of
not requiring recompilation, but the significant disadvantage of only
working on a few platforms.  Since Cygnus was primarily an embedded
development tools supplier, it was critical that we be able to supply
this feature for arbitrary platforms which Purify did not support.

However, the project was cancelled, because Pure Software owned
patents on memory checking.  It was not clear whether my code
interfered with those patents, since their product was linker based,
but based on reading the patents violation was a possibility.

Pure was known to be a litigious company, and had sued other companies
to uphold their patents.  At that time, Cygnus was a relatively small
company, and a lawsuit would have been a serious drain on our
resources.  Therefore, the project was cancelled.

I estimate that I implemented about 80% of the required work.  I
developed a simple testsuite of some twenty or thirty cases which were
all handled correctly.  Most of the remaining required work was
optimizing the data structures and implementing compiler optimizations
based on known memory access checks--avoiding checking the same area
of memory twice, coalescing memory checks when possible, etc.  The
goal was that checked code run at at least 50% of the speed of
ordinary code; I don't know whether or not I would have reached that
goal, as the project was cancelled before I did any serious speed
testing.

I'd be happy to answer questions, although of course this was a few
years ago so I no longer recall all the details.  I am no longer at
Cygnus, and I don't know if the work I did is still available.

@end quotation

@node Programming, Drivers, Compilers, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Programming

@menu
* HyperProf::                   
* OpenIPO::                     
* Virtual functions in C++::    
* CDDB/FreeDB::                 
* ElectricFence::               
@end menu

@node HyperProf, OpenIPO, Programming, Programming
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section HyperProf

Tuomas Lukka @email{lukka@@mit.jyu.fi}

@quotation
@url{http://www.physics.orst.edu/~bulatov/HyperProf/index.html}

This is home of my hyperbolic browser of Java profile. It allows to
represent results of Java profiling in more readable way, as well as it
offers cool interactive hyperbolic representation of packages, classes,
methods and calls of your Java program.

....

Downloading

You can NOT currently download HyperProf-1.3.tar.gz(90K) or 
HyperProf-1.3.zip (132K) because Xerox have patented algorithm 
for tree visualization which is similar to one used in HyperProf and 
things should be settled down first.

-----

So this is one piece of really interesting visualization software that
has been withdrawn. Sad but true.
@end quotation


@node OpenIPO, Virtual functions in C++, HyperProf, Programming
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section OpenIPO

@email{sashi@@easy.com.au}

@quotation
Around February 2000, I heard about W.R.Hambrecht and Cos.' IPO scheme
that was based on the work of the Nobel prize-winning economist John
Vickrey. It's basically a fairer way to arrive at the issue price of a
share based on potential investors' bids. The share floats at the
highest price at which the required funds can be collected, not some
arbitrary price decided by underwriters.

I thought of writing a free software package to enable underwriters to
run such an IPO themselves, but first contacted W.R.Hambrecht & Co. to
see if they had patented the procedure. I can dig up the relevant
correspondence (it's on another machine's mailbox somewhere...) but the
gist of their reply was that they had made significant innovations on
top of Vickrey's work and that they intended to defend their
intellectual property. They did not explicitly mention any patent.  I
lost interest in pursuing the OpenIPO software after that, even though I
have the engine ready and working. If the patent threat is removed, I'll
be happy to resume work on it.

Ganesh Prasad
@url{http://netwinsite.com}
@end quotation

@node Virtual functions in C++, CDDB/FreeDB, OpenIPO, Programming
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Virtual functions in C++

Tom Tromey @email{tromey@@redhat.com}

@quotation

There are many patents surrounding how to implement virtual functions in
C++.  Many of the obvious approaches to implementing vtables are
patented.  I believe this has affected the design of the new G++ ABI.

Jason Merrill @email{jason@@redhat.com} probably has more details.

@end quotation

@node CDDB/FreeDB, ElectricFence, Virtual functions in C++, Programming
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section CDDB/FreeDB

Marc van Woerkom @email{marc.vanwoerkom@@science-factory.com}

@quotation
If you haven't noticed yet, check out the Slashdot article on CDDB's 
stupid patent.  

@url{http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=00/12/08/2254214&mode=thread}

An Anonymous Coward writes: "Today I received a very ominous package
from GraceNote, owners of CDDB. Already infamous for turning a wonderful
open project into a quagmire of heavy contracts, licensing fees, forced
user registration and anti-competition clauses, the package from
GraceNote contained one thing: copies of their patents, freshly
awarded. "Don't even think about using FreeDB", the packaged seemed to
silently imply, "because we own the patents, period." That patent?
"Method and system for finding approximate matches in a database."
Ouch. Thanks, USPTO." Scary: I use freedb constantly. I'd hate to lose
it.

Method and system for finding approximate matches in a database.
@url{http://www.delphion.com/details?&pn=US06061680__}

@end quotation


Robert Kaye @email{rob@@emusic.com}

@quotation
Two years ago I started a project called the CD Index
(http://www.cdindex.org) which was aimed to be a replacement for the
CDDB system. CDDB is designed to look up the title, artist name and
track names for a CD, so that a software CD player can display the
titles during playback.

Once upon a time CDDB was open and the data was freely available to
anyone who cared to download it. The server source code and the client
source code to calculate the unique ID for a given CD were freely
available on the net. IANAL (I am not a lawyer), so I cannot tell if
this would qualify as prior art to discredit this patent, but it sure
smells like it.

After a few years in existence CDDB was sold to Escient Inc., who then
stopped making the data available on the net and started to force
creators of software CD players to agree to very restrictive licensing
agreements in order for their players to access the CDDB database.

These restrictive licensing agreements to access the data that was
contributed by the general public were the motivation for me to create
the CD Index. This summer I started the follow up project called
MusicBrainz (http://www.musicbrainz.org) in order to generalize the
project to be an open metadatabase for audio content. The system now
supports the identification of MP3s and Ogg/Vorbis files as well.

Last week CDDB/Gracenote (formerly Escient) was awarded a patent which
now restricts the calculation of a unique ID for a CD/DVD disk based on
the table of contents of the CD/DVD. The patent also coveres other
aspects, but this is currently the most serious issue. Slashdot covered
this patent in the following article:

   http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=00/12/08/2254214&mode=thread

I have not received a cease-and-desist letter, but given the CDDB's
previous track record it cannot be long before I will get that magic
letter. Without having read the complete patent, I cannot say how
MusicBrainz will be affected. In the worst case scenario, we may need to
stop our service to look up CD information.

If you have further questions, or if I can provide you with more
information, please don't hesitate to ask. My contact information is
below:

     Robert Kaye
     Emusic.com SLO
     1304 Garden St.
     San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
     (805) 785-0607
     rob@@emusic.com

Thank you for taking the software patent issue up, and thank you for all
the efforts of the GNU/FSF team.

@end quotation


Drew Streib @email{ds@@valinux.com}

@quotation
Relevant patents are 5987525, 6154773, and 6061680.

(Drew sent anothe email where he exchanged some comments with John
Gilmore from EFF)

I've done some research in the subject and believe that the patent
is invalidated by prior art.

@end quotation

@node ElectricFence,  , CDDB/FreeDB, Programming
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section ElectricFence

Francois PELLEGRINI @email{pelegrin@@labri.u-bordeaux.fr}

@quotation
  I think Bruce Perens was threatened over his ElectricFence bounds
checking system for C programs by a company which obtained a patent
while he was still developing it.

  If I remember well, the memory leak checking algorithm was patented by
Pure Software for its "Purify" tool. Pure software merged with Atria
(www.pureatria.com), and finally got swallowed by Rational Software
(www.rational.com).

  If I remember well, Pure Software reportedly threatened to sue any
individual trying to produce a libre enhanced version of memory-leak
checkers. It is why, although the need for such a tool is obvious in any
libre distribution for developers, it is still missing.

@end quotation

@node Drivers, Communication Protocols, Programming, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Drivers

@menu
* CueCat::                      
@end menu

@node CueCat,  , Drivers, Drivers
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section CueCat

Michael Rothwell @email{rothwell@@holly-springs.nc.us}

@quotation

@url{http://www.flyingbuttmonkeys.com/foocat/}

I've recieved two letters from the law firm representing Digital
Convergence. I didn't back down, and they have not (as of yet) done
anything about it. As far as I know, they are licensing NeoMedia's
patents (search for NeoMedia on @url{delphion.com}). They've written a
LOT of these letters, and most people folded.

@end quotation

@node Communication Protocols,  , Drivers, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Communication Protocols

@menu
* WAP::                         
@end menu

@node WAP,  , Communication Protocols, Communication Protocols
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section WAP

Richard M. Stallman @email{rms@@gnu.org}

@quotation
WAP could be a good example of software patents that can be very
harmful.  WAP includes a whole series of gratuitously-incompatible
modified versions of standard Internet protocols.  The idea seems to
be to sell the public mobile phones that can only talk to specially
designed servers, not to ordinary Internet servers.  And since the
protocols are patented, it will be impossible to write free software
to set up those servers.

You can get more information from the Free Protocols Foundation.

@url{http://www.freeprotocols.org}

@end quotation

@bye
