What Is Copyleft?

Copyleft is a general method for making a program free software and
requiring all modified and extended versions of the program to be free
software as well.

The simplest way to make a program free is to put it in the public
domain (18k characters), uncopyrighted. This allows people to share
the program and their improvements, if they are so minded. But it also
allows uncooperative people to convert the program into proprietary
software (18k characters). They can make changes, many or few, and
distribute the result as a proprietary product. People who receive the
program in that modified form do not have the freedom that the
original author gave them; the middleman has stripped it away.

In the GNU project, our aim is to give all users the freedom to
redistribute and change GNU software. If middlemen could strip off the
freedom, we might have many users, but those users would not have
freedom. So instead of putting GNU software in the public domain, we
``copyleft'' it. Copyleft says that anyone who redistributes the
software, with or without changes, must pass along the freedom to
further copy and change it. Copyleft guarantees that every user has
freedom.

Copyleft also provides an incentive for other programmers to add to
free software. Important free programs such as the GNU C++ compiler
exist only because of this.

Copyleft also helps programmers who want to contribute improvements to
free software get permission to do that. These programmers often work
for companies or universities that would do almost anything to get
more money. A programmer may want to contribute her changes to the
community, but her employer may want to turn the changes into a
proprietary software product.

When we explain to the employer that it is illegal to distribute the
improved version except as free software, the employer usually decides
to release it as free software rather than throw it away.

To copyleft a program, we first state that it is copyrighted; then we
add distribution terms, which are a legal instrument that gives
everyone the rights to use, modify, and redistribute the program's
code or any program derived from it, but only if the distribution terms
are unchanged. Thus, the code and the freedoms become legally
inseparable.

Proprietary software developers use copyright to take away the users'
freedom; we use copyright to guarantee their freedom. That's why we
reverse the name, changing ``copyright'' into ``copyleft.''

Copyleft is a general concept; there are many ways to fill in the
details. In the GNU Project, the specific distribution terms that we
use are contained in the GNU General Public License (GNU GPL for
short).

An alternate form of copyleft, the GNU Lesser General Public License
(LGPL) (available in HTML, text, and Texinfo format), applies to a few
(but not all) GNU libraries. This license was formerly called the
Library GPL, but we changed the name, because the old name encouraged
people to use this license more often than it should be used. 

The GNU Library General Public License is still available in HTML and
text format although it has been superseded by the Lesser GPL.

The GNU Free Documentation License (FDL) (available in HTML, text and
Texinfo) is a form of copyleft intended for use on a manual, textbook
or other document to assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and
redistribute it, with or without modifications, either commercially or
noncommercially.

The appropriate license is included in many manuals and in each GNU
source code distribution.

The GNU GPL is designed so that you can easily apply it to your own
program if you are the copyright holder. You don't have to modify the
GNU GPL to do this; just add notices to your program that refer
properly to the GNU GPL.

Please note that you must use the entire text of the GPL, if you use
it. It is an integral whole, and partial copies are not
permitted. (Likewise for the LGPL.)

Using the same distribution terms for many different programs makes it
easy to copy code between various different programs. Since they all
have the same distribution terms, there is no need to think about
whether the terms are compatible. The Lesser GPL includes a provision
that lets you alter the distribution terms to the ordinary GPL, so
that you can copy code into another program covered by the GPL.

