@node  Glossary, , GNU Free Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Glossary

@table @asis

@item Ada
Named after Ada Lovelace. Developed for the United States Department of Defense
in 1979, it is a large, high level language often used in embedded applications. 

@item Assembler

    An assembler is a software program that is usually specific to a
given type of computer.  It converts assembly language (see below)
into `machine code'.  Machine code gives instructions in a way that
only one particularly type of computer can understand.  In the past,
the assembler program had to be run on the file produced by the
compiler in order to produce machine code.  Nowadays, a ``compiler''
usually includes this step as well.

@item Assembly Language
    Assembly language is a computer programming
    language that is at a level slightly easier to read
    than Machine Code (see assembler).  It is still quite challenging
    and difficult for a person to write directly in assembly language.
    Generally, most
    programmers write in a ``higher level'' language like C.  A
    language like C is complied into assembly language automatically
    by a compiler (see below).

@item Binary 
    Binary is the basic langauge of a computer.  A computer
    understands only the number `0' and `1', so all material that a
    computer reads and writes must be converted into a series of ones
    and zeros.  In other words, the material must be represented in
    the binary (base 2) number system. 
    For comparison, our base 10 number system contains 10
    numbers: 0 through 9.  It has been speculated that  we use a
    base 10 system  because we have 10 fingers.  By contrast,  the
    computer has only two types of ``fingers'', via electrical
    impulses---either ``on'' (for one) or ``off'' (for zero).
    Machine code (see Assembler, above) is represented using this binary
    system.

@item Binaries  
    ``Binaries'' refer to compiled computer programs, stored on a
    disk in machine code.  A user can run a binary directly, and thus
    command a computer to perform some set of tasks.  Binaries can
    only be understood by the computer; they are not in a
    human-readible format.


@item C
    C is a programming language created by Brian Kernigan
    and Dennis Ritchie in 1972.  While the early implementations of C
    were proprietary software, the specification for the langauge was
    readily avilable, and thus others were allowed to make their own
    versions of C.  C is still widely used today.

@item C++
    C++ was largely developed by Bjarne Sroustrup in 1986.
    It is based on the original C
    language and incorporated advances in computer science
    that had occurred since C was first written.  C++ is still widely
    used today.

@item Command-Line Interface
    Command-line interface refers to a method of
    talking or interacting with a computer.  Command-line interfaces
    were invented before graphical interfaces (see
    below).  Many operating systems use the
    command-line style, including Unix-like systems and MS-DOS.  When
    using a command-line interface, the computer ``prompts'' the user
    for commands.  The user enters commands as strings of text, and
    the computer responds with more strings of text.

@item Compiler
    A compiler is a computer program that acts
    as a translator between the programmer and the
    computer.  The programmer uses a programming language,
    such as C, to write her software program.  The
    compiler translates the program into a language the computer
    can understand (see Assembler, above).

@item Copyleft
    Copyleft is a play on the word ``copyright'', to refer to
    ``copyright turned over'' or ``copyright turned on its head''.
    Most copyright licenses prohibit a computer user from copying,
    modifing, redistributing, or even studying the software.  By
    contrast, copyleft licenses assert users rights to do so, and use
    copyright law to defend the users' rights to carry out those
    activities.  The GNU General Public License (GNU GPL, see below)
    is the most widely used copyleft license.

@item DeCSS
<HELP>

@item DMCA
<HELP>

@item E-Books
    E-book is short for ``Electronic Book''.  An E-book is is made
available to the reader as a computer file.  A special software
program is usually required to display the content of the book on a
computer screen. ``E-book readers'' are small, hand-held computers
that contain the special software and are used primiarly for
displaying such books.

@item Emacs, GNU Emacs
    GNU Emacs, started in 1984, was the first software program for the
GNU system.  GNU Emacs is used to edit text documents.  GNU Emacs was
designed to be easily changed and customized.

@c
@c  I started to rework this definition, but after some thought I
@c  realized that it really doesn't belong here.  Throughout his
@c  essays, RMS makes it clear what he means by free, and what the
@c  Free Software Movement means by Free.  I don't see much point in
@c  defining it here, because any definition we give will be
@c  inadequate.  The whole book, in some sense, is about ``Free''
@c
@c @item Free  
@c     The word 'free' refers to 'freely
@c     distributable', not no-cost.   Free Software advocates
@c     believe that software should have special copyrights,
@c     that allow it to be shared.  Most software has
@c     restrictive copyrights that forbid copying without
@c     permission.  Many people erroneously believe that
@c     making illegal copies of copyrighted software without
@c     paying anything to the company is 'free' software. 
@c     This is incorrect.  Advocates of free software believe
@c     that the most important freedom is the right to have
@c     access to the source code (see below). Without this
@c     access, programmers cannot learn and grow, rapid
@c     advancement of computer science cannot take place, and
@c     people are slaves to the company that produces the
@c     proprietary software, with no chance of bettering
@c     themselves. 

@item GNU
    The name ``GNU'' was a playfully designed ``recursive''
acronym---meaning that the acronym itself is part of the acronym's
expansion.  GNU stands for ``GNU is Not Unix''.  Unix is a
proprietary software operating system invented at Bell Labs in the
early 1970s.  The GNU Project set forth to write a completely Free
Software Unix-compatible operating system, which is today incarnated
in modern GNU/Linux systems.

@item Graphical Interface
    Graphical interface refers to a method of talking or interacting
with a computer.  In a graphical interface enviornment (often called
``Graphical User Interface'' or GUI enviornment) functions of the
computer are represented as pictures.  The user typically uses the
mouse to click on pictures in order to give commadns to the
computer.

@item k
@emph{see kilobyte, below.}

@item kilobyte
    A kilobyte is a unit of measure.  One kilobyte is 1000 bytes.  A
Byte is the smallest unit of information a computer typically stores.
Modern users usually hear storage sizes in terms of ``meg'' (short for
``megabyte'', or about 1 million bytes) and ``gig'' (short for
``gigabyte'', or about 100 million bytes).  However, throughout most
of the 1980s and into the early 1990s, computer storage was usually
measured in kilobytes.

@item Less
    Less is the name of a GNU program found on GNU/Linux systems.
It is a playful joke on the name of the Unix program it was written to
replace called ``more''.  The program is used to view a text file
screen-by-screen in command-line (see above) mode.

@item LessTif


@item Linux
  Linux is a kernel written by Linus Torvalds in 1991. It has quickly
become one of the most important Kernels in the world, and can be
found on more then half of the worlds web servers.

@item Linux Kernel
See Linux

@item MCC
<DEFINE>

@item Motif
<DEFINE>

@item Nanotechnology
    Nanotechnology is the field of science
    attempting to create tiny robots the size of cells,
    designed to make one change to the biology life form
    they are introduced into.  A common example given as a
    use for nanotechnology, is the ability of the tiny
    robots to scrape away the cholesterol plaque built up
    in a patient's arteries, thus avoiding the need for
    major surgery.

@item Napster
<DEFINE>

@item Open Source
    The term 'Open Source', coined By Eric Raymond, was 
    designed to represent a more restricted form of free 
    software that would better appeal to business interests. 

@item Pay Pal

@item Pirate
Historically it has meant one who plunders or robs at sea
However, in modern times the word has been used to describe
the act of sharing proprietary software (see below), which is often
illegal to copy and redistribute.

@item Posix
<DEFINE>

@item Proprietary
    The term proprietary implies monopolistic
    ownership.  It is used to mean that a software program
    has a restrictive copyright that does not allow it to
    be easily shared, or it's source code to be easily
    accessed. The term was developed because calling
    software 'copyrighted' does not have the same meaning.
    There are many types of copyright licenses granting
    different levels of permission to use a program; being
    copyrighted does not automatically mean forbidding to
    copy or modify.  'Proprietary software' is often used
    as an antonym for 'Free software'. 

@item Qt
<DEFINE>

@item Real Audio
<DEFINE>

@item RMS 
    Richard Matthew Stallman became known as 'rms'
    because of an old computer tradition that existed back
    when the computer user community was much smaller. 
    During the 1970s and early 80s, multi-user computer
    systems required people to have 'user names' to sign
    into the computer, just like today. However, since the
    community was so small, people often just used their
    first name or their initials.  These user names became
    nicknames within the community.

@item Software
<DEFINE>

@item Shell
    A shell is a computer concept used in
    multi-user operating systems like Unix and GNU/Linux. 
    It creates an environment that the user can be 'in',
    and allows the user to interact with the computer. It
    is also  'place' for a user to keep all their files. 
    Each user's shell can be changed to suit their taste,
    creating a personally tailored environment.  Some
    shells have so many features that they can be used as
    programming languages.
1
@item windows
    Windows is the shortened term commonly used
    to refer to the Microsoft Windows Operating System. It
    is a graphic-focused style where the user clicks on a
    picture to run a command.  It is in direct contrast to
    older style operating systems like MS-DOS and Unix.

@item X Windows
    X Windows is an early graphic interface,
    originally developed for MIT's project Athena .  It can work
    with Unix and GNU/Linux to provide a graphic interface
    front-end.  It is a popular graphic interface amongst
    universities and computer scientists. 

@item Xerox


@item Xerox Parc
<DEFINE> .


@end table

