@c This is part of The Collected Essays and Speeches of Richard M. Stallman
@node Science Must, What is Copyleft, Misinterpreting Copyright---A Series of Errors, Top
@chapter Science Must `Push' Copyright Aside


@tex 
%%  unnumberedfootnote
%%  Since`footnotezzz' uses `thisfootno', set it to nothing.   
\global\let\thisfootno\
\global\def\unnumberedfootnote{\footnotezzz}%
@end tex

@unnumberedfootnote{
@smallformat
This essay originally appeared on @uref{http://www.nature.com} in 1991 in their @emph{Web Debates} section; this version is part of @emph{Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman}, 2002, GNU Press 
(http://www.gnupress.org); ISBN 1-882114-98-1.
@end smallformat
@flushleft
@center Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is
@center permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved
@end flushleft
}

It should be a truism that scientific literature exists to disseminate
scientific knowledge, and that scientific journals exist to facilitate
the process. It therefore follows that rules for use of scientific
literature should be designed to help achieve that goal.

The rules we have now, known as copyright, were established in the age
of the printing press, an inherently centralized method of
mass-production copying. In a print environment, copyright on journal
articles restricted only journal publishers, requiring them to obtain
permission to publish an article, and would-be plagiarists. It helped
journals to operate and disseminate knowledge, without interfering with
the useful work of scientists or students, either as writers or readers
of articles. These rules fit that system well.

The modern technology for scientific publishing, however, is the World
Wide Web. What rules would best ensure the maximum dissemination of
scientific articles, and knowledge, on the Web?  Articles should be
distributed in non-proprietary formats, with open access for all. And
everyone should have the right to ``mirror'' articles; that is, to
republish them verbatim with proper attribution.

These rules should apply to past as well as future articles, when they
are distributed in electronic form. But there is no crucial need to
change the present copyright system as it applies to paper publication
of journals, because the problem is not in that domain.

Unfortunately, it seems that not everyone agrees with the truisms that
began this article. Many journal publishers appear to believe that the
purpose of scientific literature is to enable them to publish journals
so as to collect subscriptions from scientists and students. Such
thinking is known as ``confusion of the means with the ends.''

Their approach has been to restrict access even to read the scientific
literature to those who can and will pay for it. They use copyright law,
which is still in force despite its inappropriateness for computer
networks, as an excuse to stop scientists from choosing new rules.

For the sake of scientific cooperation and humanity's future, we must
reject that approach at its root---not merely the obstructive systems
that have been instituted, but the mistaken priorities that inspired
them.

Journal publishers sometimes claim that on-line access requires
expensive high-powered server machines, and that they must charge access
fees to pay for these servers. This ``problem'' is a consequence of its
own ``solution.'' Give everyone the freedom to mirror, and libraries
around the world will set up mirror sites to meet the demand. This
decentralized solution will reduce network bandwidth needs and provide
faster access, all the while protecting the scholarly record against
accidental loss.

Publishers also argue that paying the editors requires charging for
access. Let us accept the assumption that editors must be paid; this
tail need not wag the dog. The cost of editing for a typical paper is
between 1% and 3% of the cost of funding the research to produce
it. Such a small percentage of the cost can hardly justify obstructing
the use of the results.

Instead, the cost of editing could be recovered, for example, through
page charges to the authors, who can pass these on to the research
sponsors. The sponsors should not mind, given that they currently pay
for publication in a more cumbersome way through overhead fees for the
university library's subscription to the journal. By changing the
economic model to charge editing costs to the research sponsors, we can
eliminate the apparent need to restrict access. The occasional author
who is not affiliated with an institution or company, and who has no
research sponsor, could be exempted from page charges, with costs levied
on institution-based authors.

Another justification for access fees to on-line publications is to fund
conversion of the print archives of a journal into on-line form. That
work needs to be done, but we should seek alternative ways of funding it
that do not involve obstructing access to the result. The work itself
will not be any more difficult, or cost any more. It is self-defeating
to digitize the archives and waste the results by restricting access.

The U.S. Constitution says that copyright exists ``to promote the
progress of science.'' When copyright impedes the progress of science,
science must push copyright out of the way.
