@node Selling Free Software, freedocumentation, Releasing Free Software, Top
@chapter Selling Free Software

Many people believe that the spirit of the GNU project is that you
should not charge money for distributing copies of software, or that you
should charge as little as possible---just enough to cover the cost.

Actually, we encourage people who redistribute free software to charge as
much as they wish or can. If this seems surprising to you, please read
on.

The word ``free'' has two legitimate general meanings; it can refer
either to freedom or to price. When we speak of ``free software,'' we're
talking about freedom, not price.@footnote{Remember to think of ``free'' as
in ``free speech,'' not as in ``free beer.''}  Specifically, it means
that a user is free to run the program, change the program, and
redistribute the program with or without changes.


@tex 
%%  unnumberedfootnote
%%  Since`footnotezzz' uses `thisfootno', set it to nothing.   
\global\let\thisfootno\
\global\def\unnumberedfootnote{\footnotezzz}%
@end tex

@unnumberedfootnote{
@smallformat
Originally written in 1996, this version is part of @emph{Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman}, 2002, GNU Press (http://www.gnupress.org); ISBN 1-882114-98-1.
@end smallformat
@flushleft
@center Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is
@center permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved
@end flushleft
}


Free programs are sometimes distributed gratis, and sometimes for a
substantial price.  Often the same program is available in both ways
from different places. The program is free regardless of the price,
because users have freedom in using it.

Non-free programs are usually sold for a high price, but sometimes a
store will give you a copy at no charge. That doesn't make it free
software, though. Price or no price, the program is non-free because
users don't have freedom.

Since free software is not a matter of price, a low price isn't more
free, or closer to free. So if you are redistributing copies of free
software, you might as well charge a substantial fee and make some
money. Redistributing free software is a good and legitimate activity;
if you do it, you might as well make a profit from it.

Free software is a community project, and everyone who depends on it
ought to look for ways to contribute to building the community. For a
distributor, the way to do this is to give a part of the profit to the
Free Software Foundation or some other free software development
project. By funding development, you can advance the world of free
software.

Distributing free software is an opportunity to raise funds for
development. Don't waste it!

In order to contribute funds, you need to have some extra. If you charge
too low a fee, you won't have anything to spare to support development.

 
@heading Will a higher distribution price hurt some users?

People sometimes worry that a high distribution fee will put free
software out of range for users who don't have a lot of money. With
proprietary software, a high price does exactly that---but free
software is different.

The difference is that free software naturally tends to spread around,
and there are many ways to get it.

Software hoarders try their damnedest to stop you from running a
proprietary program without paying the standard price. If this price is
high, that does make it hard for some users to use the program.

With free software, users don't have to pay the distribution fee in
order to use the software.  They can copy the program from a friend who
has a copy, or with the help of a friend who has network access. Or
several users can join together, split the price of one CD-ROM, then
each in turn can install the software. A high CD-ROM price is not a
major obstacle when the software is free.

 
@heading Will a higher distribution price discourage use of free software?

Another common concern is for the popularity of free software. People
think that a high price for distribution would reduce the number of
users, or that a low price is likely to encourage users.

This is true for proprietary software---but free software is
different. With so many ways to get copies, the price of distribution
service has less effect on popularity.

In the long run, how many people use free software is determined mainly
by how much free software can do, and how easy it is to use. Many users
will continue to use proprietary software if free software can't do all
the jobs they want to do. Thus, if we want to increase the number of
users in the long run, we should above all develop more free software.

The most direct way to do this is by writing needed free software or
manuals yourself. But if you do distribution rather than writing, the
best way you can help is by raising funds for others to write them.

 
@heading  The term ``selling software'' can be confusing too

Strictly speaking, ``selling'' means trading goods for money. Selling a
copy of a free program is legitimate, and we encourage it.

However, when people think of ``selling software,'' they usually imagine
doing it the way most companies do it: making the software proprietary
rather than free.

So unless you're going to draw distinctions carefully, the way this
article does, we suggest it is better to avoid using the term ``selling
software'' and choose some other wording instead. For example, you could
say ``distributing free software for a fee''---that is unambiguous.

 
@heading  High or low fees, and the GNU GPL

Except for one special situation, the GNU General Public License (GNU
GPL) has no requirements about how much you can charge for distributing
a copy of free software. You can charge nothing, a penny, a dollar, or a
billion dollars. It's up to you, and the marketplace, so don't complain
to us if nobody wants to pay a billion dollars for a copy.

The one exception is in the case where binaries are distributed without
the corresponding complete source code. Those who do this are required
by the GNU GPL to provide source code on subsequent request. Without a
limit on the fee for the source code, they would be able set a fee too
large for anyone to pay---such as a billion dollars---and thus pretend to
release source code while in truth concealing it. So in this case we
have to limit the fee for source, to ensure the user's freedom. In
ordinary situations, however, there is no such justification for
limiting distribution fees, so we do not limit them.

Sometimes companies whose activities cross the line of what the GNU GPL
permits plead for permission, saying that they ``won't charge money for
the GNU software'' or such like. They don't get anywhere this way. Free
software is about freedom, and enforcing the GPL is defending
freedom. When we defend users' freedom, we are not distracted by side
issues such as how much of a distribution fee is charged. Freedom is the
issue, the whole issue, and the only issue.







