@node Topic Guide, introduction, software note, Top
@cindex Topic Guide

@unnumbered Topic Guide

Since the essays and speeches in this book were addressed to different
audiences at different times, there is a considerable amount of
overlap, with some issues being discussed in more than one place.
Because of this, and because we did not have the opportunity to make
an index for this book, it could be hard to go back to something you
read about unless its location is obvious from a chapter title.

We hope that this short guide, though sketchy and incomplete (it does
not cover all topics or all discussions of a given topic), will help
you find some of the ideas and explanations you are interested in.

@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @emph{--Julie Sussman, P.P.A.}
@sp 1


@noindent
@strong{Overview}

Chapter 1 gives an overview of just about all the software-related
topics in this book.  Chapter 20 is also an overview.

For the non-software topics, see Privacy and Personal Freedom,
Intellectual Property, and Copyright, below.

@noindent
@strong{GNU Project}

For the history of the GNU project, see Chapters 1 and 20

For a delightful explanation of the origin and pronunciation of the
recursive acronym GNU (GNU's Not Unix, pronounced guh-NEW), see
Chapter 20.

The ``manifesto'' that launched the GNU Project is included here as
Chapter 2.

See also the Linux, GNU/Linux topic below.

@noindent
@strong{Free Software Foundation}

You can read about the history and function of the Free Software
Foundation in Chapters 1 and 20, and under ``Funding Free Software''
in Chapter 18.

@noindent
@strong{Free software}

We will not attempt to direct you to all discussions of free software
in this book, since every chapter @emph{except} 11, 12, 13, 16, 17,
and 19 deals with free software.

For a history of free software---from free software to proprietary
software and back again---see Chapter 1.

@emph{Free Software} is defined, and the definition discussed, in
Chapter 3.  The definition is repeated in several other chapters.

For a discussion of the ambiguity of the word ``free'' and why we
still use it to mean ``free'' as in ``free speech,'' not as in ``free
beer,'' see ``Free as in Freedom'' in Chapter 1 and ``Ambiguity'' in
chapter 6.

See also Source Code, Open Source, and Copyleft, below.

@emph{Free software} is translated into 21 languages in Chapter 21.

@noindent
@strong{Source Code}, @strong{Source}

@emph{Source code} is mentioned throughout the discussions of free
software.  If you're not sure what that is, read ``A Note on
Software.''

@noindent
@strong{Linux}, @strong{GNU/Linux}

For the origin of Linux, and the distinction between Linux (the
operating-system kernel) and GNU/Linux (a full operating system), see
the short mention under ``Linux and GNU/Linux'' in Chapter 1 and the
full story in Chapter 20.

For reasons to say @emph{GNU/Linux} when referring to that operating
system rather than abbreviating it to @emph{Linux} see Chapters 5 and
20.

@noindent
@strong{Privacy and Personal Freedom}

For some warnings about the loss of personal freedom, privacy, and
access to written material that we have long taken for granted, see
Chapters 11, 13, and 17.  All of these are geared to a general
audience.

@noindent
@strong{Open Source}

For the difference between the Open Source movement and the Free
Software movement, see Chapter 6.  This is also discussed in Chapter 1
(under ``Open Source'') and Chapter 20.

@noindent
@strong{Intellectual Property}

For an explanation of why the term ``intellectual property'' is both
misleading and a barrier to addressing so-called ``intellectual
property'' issues, see Chapter 21 and the beginning of Chapter 16.

For particular types of ``intellectual property'' see the Copyright
and Patents topics, below.

@noindent
@strong{Copyright}

Note: Most of these copyright references are @emph{not} about
software.

For the history, purpose, implementation, and effects of copyright, as
well as recommendations for copyright policy, see Chapters 12 and 19.
Topics critical in our digital age, such as e-books and the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), are addressed here.

For the difference between patents and copyrights, see Chapter 16.

For the use of copyright in promoting free software and free
documentation, see Copyleft, just below.

@noindent
@strong{Copyleft}

For an explanation of copyleft and how it uses the copyright system to
promote free software, see Chapter 1 (under ``Copyleft and the GNU
GPL''), Chapter 14, and Chapter 20.  See also Licenses, below.

For an argument that copyleft is practical and effective as well as
idealistic, see Chapter 15.

Chapter 9 argues for free manuals to accompany free software.

@noindent
@strong{Licenses}

The GNU licenses, which can be used to copyleft software or manuals,
are introduced in Chapter 14 and given in full in Section Four.

@noindent
@strong{Patents}

See Chapter 16 for the difference between patents and copyrights and
for arguments against patenting software and why it is different from
other patentable things. Software-patent policy in other countries is
also discussed.

@noindent
@strong{Hacker} versus @strong{Cracker}

For the proper use of these terms see the beginning of Chapter 1.

@tex 
%% unnumberedfootnote 
%% Since`footnotezzz' uses `thisfootno', set it to nothing.  
\global\let\thisfootno\
\global\def\unnumberedfootnote{\footnotezzz}%
@end tex
@unnumberedfootnote{
@flushleft
@center Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is  
@center permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved
@end flushleft
}
