@c This is part of The Collected Essays and Speeches of Richard M. Stallman
@node  What is Copyleft, Copyleft, Science Must, Top
@chapter What is Copyleft?

@tex 
%%  unnumberedfootnote
%%  Since`footnotezzz' uses `thisfootno', set it to nothing.   
\global\let\thisfootno\
\global\def\unnumberedfootnote{\footnotezzz}%
@end tex

@unnumberedfootnote{
@smallformat
Originally written in 1996, this version is part of @emph{Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman}, 2002, GNU Press (http://www.gnupress.org); ISBN 1-882114-98-1.
@end smallformat
@flushleft
@center @emph Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is 
@center @emph permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved
@end flushleft
}

@c index What is Copyleft
@c sp 2
@c image{images/philosophical-gnu, 4in, 5in}
@c sp 4
@c center @strong{Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted }
@c center @strong{in any medium, provided this notice is preserved.}
@c page
@c sp 2
Copyleft is a general method for making a program free software and
requiring all modified and extended versions of the program to be free
software as well.

The simplest way to make a program free is to put it in the public
domain, uncopyrighted. This allows people to share the program and their
improvements, if they are so minded. But it also allows uncooperative
people to convert the program into proprietary software. They can make
changes, many or few, and distribute the result as a proprietary
product. People who receive the program in that modified form do not
have the freedom that the original author gave them; the middleman has
stripped it away.

In the GNU project, our aim is to give all users the freedom to
redistribute and change GNU software. If middlemen could strip off the
freedom, we might have many users, but those users would not have
freedom. So instead of putting GNU software in the public domain, we
``copyleft'' it. Copyleft says that anyone who redistributes the
software, with or without changes, must pass along the freedom to
further copy and change it. Copyleft guarantees that every user has
freedom.

Copyleft also provides an incentive for other programmers to add to free
software. Important free programs such as the GNU C++ compiler exist
only because of this.

Copyleft also helps programmers who want to contribute improvements to
free software get permission to do that. These programmers often work
for companies or universities that would do almost anything to get more
money. A programmer may want to contribute her changes to the community,
but her employer may want to turn the changes into a proprietary
software product.

When we explain to the employer that it is illegal to distribute the
improved version except as free software, the employer usually decides
to release it as free software rather than throw it away.

To copyleft a program, we first state that it is copyrighted; then we
add distribution terms, which are a legal instrument that gives everyone
the rights to use, modify, and redistribute the program's code or any
program derived from it but only if the distribution terms are
unchanged. Thus, the code and the freedoms become legally inseparable.

Proprietary software developers use copyright to take away the users'
freedom; we use copyright to guarantee their freedom. That's why we
reverse the name, changing ``copyright'' into ``copyleft.''

Copyleft is a general concept; there are many ways to fill in the
details. In the GNU Project, the specific distribution terms that we
use are contained in the GNU General Public License. The GNU General
Public License is often called the GNU GPL for short. There is also a
Frequently Asked Questions page
(http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html) about the GNU GPL. You can
also read about why the FSF gets copyright assignments from
contributors (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/why-assign.html).

An alternate form of copyleft, the GNU Lesser General Public License
(LGPL), applies to a few (but not all) GNU libraries. This license was
formerly called the Library GPL, but we changed the name, because the
old name encouraged developers to use this license more often than it should be
used. For an explanation of why this change was necessary, read the
article Why you shouldn't use the Library GPL for your next library.

The GNU Library General Public License is still available in HTML and
text format although it has been superseded by the Lesser GPL.

The GNU Free Documentation License (FDL) is a form of copyleft intended
for use on a manual, textbook or other document to assure everyone the
effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifications, either commercially or noncommercially.

The appropriate license is included in many manuals and in each GNU
source code distribution.

The GNU GPL is designed so that you can easily apply it to your own
program if you are the copyright holder. You don't have to modify the
GNU GPL to do this, just add notices to your program which refer
properly to the GNU GPL.

If you would like to copyleft your program with the GNU GPL or the GNU
LGPL, please see the GPL instructions page for advice
(http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl-howto.html). Please note that you
must use the entire text of the GPL, if you use it. It is an integral
whole, and partial copies are not permitted. (Likewise for the LGPL.)

Using the same distribution terms for many different programs makes it
easy to copy code between various different programs. Since they all
have the same distribution terms, there is no need to think about
whether the terms are compatible. The Lesser GPL includes a provision
that lets you alter the distribution terms to the ordinary GPL, so that
you can copy code into another program covered by the GPL.

If you would like to copyleft your manual with the GNU FDL, please see
the instructions at the end of the FDL text, and the GFDL instructions
page (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl-howto.html). As with the GNU
GPL, you must use the entire license; partial copies are not
permitted.
