@node  Words to Avoid, Section Four, NYU Speech, Top
@chapter Words to Avoid

@tex 
%%  unnumberedfootnote
%%  Since`footnotezzz' uses `thisfootno', set it to nothing.   
\global\let\thisfootno\
\global\def\unnumberedfootnote{\footnotezzz}%
@end tex

@unnumberedfootnote{
@smallformat
Originally written in 1996, this version is part of @emph{Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman}, 2002, GNU Press (http://www.gnupress.org); ISBN 1-882114-98-1.
@end smallformat
@flushleft
@center Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is
@center permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved
@end flushleft
}

@emph{There are a number of words and phrases that we recommend avoiding,
either because they are ambiguous or because they imply an opinion that
we hope you may not entirely agree with.}
@*
@table @asis

@item BSD-style
The expression ``BSD-style license'' leads to confusion because it lumps
together licenses that have important differences. For instance, the
original BSD license with the advertising clause is incompatible with
the GPL, but the revised BSD license is compatible with the GPL.

To avoid confusion, it is best to name the specific license in question
and avoid the vague term ``BSD-style.''

@item Commercial
Please don't use ``commercial'' as a synonym for ``non-free.'' That
confuses two entirely different issues.

A program is commercial if it is developed as a business activity. A
commercial program can be free or non-free, depending on its
license. Likewise, a program developed by a school or an individual can
be free or non-free, depending on its license. The two questions, what
sort of entity developed the program and what freedom its users have,
are independent.

In the first decade of the Free Software movement, free-software
packages were almost always noncommercial; the components of the
GNU/Linux operating system were developed by individuals or by nonprofit
organizations such as the Free Software Foundation and universities. But in the 1990's, free
commercial software started to appear.

Free commercial software is a contribution to our community, so we
should encourage it. But people who think that ``commercial'' means
``non-free'' will tend to think that combination is self-contradictory,
and dismiss the possibility. Let's be careful not to use the word
``commercial'' in that way.

@item Content
If you want to describe a feeling of comfort and satisfaction, by all
means say ``content,'' but using it to describe written and other
works of authorship embodies a specific attitude towards those works:
that they are an interchangeable commodity whose purpose is to fill a
box and make money. In effect, it treats the works themselves with
disrespect.

Those who use this term are often the publishers that push for
increased copyright power in the name of the authors (``creators,'' as
they say) of the works. The term ``content'' reveals what they really
feel.

As long as other people use the term ``content provider,'' political
dissidents can well call themselves ``malcontent providers.''

@item Creator
The term ``creator'' as applied to authors implicitly compares them to
a deity (``the creator''). The term is used by publishers to elevate
the authors' moral stature above that of ordinary people, to justify
increased copyright power that the publishers can exercise in the name
of the authors.

@item Digital Rights Management
``Digital Rights Management'' software is actually designed to impose
restrictions on computer users. The use of the word ``rights'' in this
term is propaganda, designed to lead you unawares into seeing the
issue from the viewpoint of the few that impose the restrictions, while
ignoring that of the many whom the restrictions are imposed on.

Good alternatives include ``Digital Restrictions Management'' and
``handcuffware.''

@item For free
If you want to say that a program is free software, please don't say
that it is available ``for free.'' That term specifically means ``for
zero price.'' Free software is a matter of freedom, not price.

Free-software copies are often available for free---for example, by
downloading via FTP. But free-software copies are also available for a
price on CD-ROMs; meanwhile, proprietary-software copies are
occasionally available for free in promotions, and some proprietary
packages are normally available at no charge to certain users.

To avoid confusion, you can say that the program is available ``as free
software.''

@item Freeware
Please don't use the term ``freeware'' as a synonym for ``free
software.'' The term ``freeware'' was used often in the 1980's for
programs released only as executables, with source code not
available. Today it has no particular agreed-on definition.

Also, if you use languages other than English, please try to avoid
borrowing English words such as ``free software'' or ``freeware.'' Try
to use the often less ambiguous wording that your language offers.
This is a list of recommended unambiguous translations for the term
``free software'' into various languages.

@itemize @bullet

    @item Czech: svobodny software
    @item Danish: fri software OR frit programmel
    @item Dutch: vrije software
    @item Esperanto: libera softvaro
    @item Finnish: vapaa ohjelmisto
    @item French: logiciel libre
    @item German: freie Software
    @item Hungarian: szabad szoftver
    @item Icelandic: frjáls hugbúnaður
    @item Indonesian: perangkat lunak bebas
    @item Italian: software libero
    @item Japanese: jiyuu-na software
    @item Korean: ja-yu software
    @item Norwegian: fri programvare
    @item Polish: wolne oprogramowanie
    @item Portuguese: software livre
    @item Slovak: slobodny softver
    @item Slovenian: prosto programje
    @item Spanish: software libre
    @item Swedish: fri programvara
    @item Turkish: ozgur yazilim

@end itemize
By forming a word in your own language, you show that you are really
referring to freedom and not just parroting some mysterious foreign
marketing concept. The reference to freedom may at first seem strange or
disturbing to your countrymen, but once they see that it means exactly
what it says, they will really understand what the issue is.

@item Give away software 
It's misleading to use the term ``give away'' to mean ``distribute a
program as free software.'' It has the same problem as ``for free'':
it implies the issue is price, not freedom. One way to avoid the
confusion is to say ``release as free software.''

@item Intellectual property
Publishers and lawyers like to describe copyright as ``intellectual
property.'' This term carries a hidden assumption---that the most
natural way to think about the issue of copying is based on an analogy
with physical objects, and our ideas of them as property.

But this analogy overlooks the crucial difference between material
objects and information: information can be copied and shared almost
effortlessly, while material objects can't be. Basing your thinking on
this analogy is tantamount to ignoring that difference.

Even the U.S. legal system does not entirely accept this analogy, since it
does not treat copyrights like physical-object property rights.

If you don't want to limit yourself to this way of thinking, it is best
to avoid using the term ``intellectual property'' in your words and
thoughts.

There is another problem with ``intellectual property'': it is a
catch-all that lumps together several disparate legal systems, including
copyright, patents, trademarks, and others, which have very little in
common. These systems of law originated separately, cover different
activities, operate in different ways, and raise different public policy
issues. For instance, if you learn a fact about copyright law, you would
do well to assume it is not true for patent law, since that is almost
always true. Since these laws are so different, the term ``intellectual
property'' is an invitation to simplistic overgeneralization. Any
opinion about ``intellectual property'' is almost surely foolish. At
that broad level, you can't even see the specific public policy issues
raised by copyright law, or the different issues raised by patent law,
or any of the others.

The term ``intellectual property'' leads people to focus on the meager
common aspect of these disparate laws, which is that they establish
various abstractions that can be bought and sold, and ignore the
important aspect, which is the restrictions they place on the public and
what good or harm those restrictions cause.

If you want to think clearly about the issues raised by patents,
copyrights, and trademarks, or even learn what these laws require, the
first step is to forget that you ever heard the term ``intellectual
property'' and treat them as unrelated subjects. To give clear
information and encourage clear thinking, never speak or write about
``intellectual property''; instead, present the topic as copyright,
patents, or whichever specific law you are discussing.

According to Professor Mark Lemley of the University of Texas Law
School, the widespread use of term ``intellectual property'' is a
recent fad, arising from the 1967 founding of the World Intellectual
Property Organization@footnote{See footnote 123 in his March 1997 book
review, in the @emph{Texas Law Review}, of @emph{Romantic Authorship
and the Rhetoric of Property} by James Boyle.} (WIPO). WIPO represents
the interests of the holders of copyrights, patents, and trademarks,
and lobbies governments to increase their power. One WIPO treaty
follows the lines of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which has
been used to censor useful free software packages in the
U.S.@footnote{See http://www.wipout.net/ for a counter-WIPO campaign.}

@item Piracy 
Publishers often refer to prohibited copying as ``piracy.'' In this way,
they imply that illegal copying is ethically equivalent to attacking
ships on the high seas, kidnaping and murdering the people on them.

If you don't believe that illegal copying is just like kidnaping and
murder, you might prefer not to use the word ``piracy'' to describe
it. Neutral terms such as ``prohibited copying'' or ``unauthorized
copying'' are available for use instead. Some of us might even prefer to
use a positive term such as ``sharing information with your neighbor.''

@item Protection 
Publishers' lawyers love to use the term ``protection'' to describe
copyright. This word carries the implication of preventing destruction
or suffering; therefore, it encourages people to identify with the
owner and publisher who benefit from copyright, rather than with the
users who are restricted by it.

It is easy to avoid ``protection'' and use neutral terms instead. For
example, instead of ``Copyright protection lasts a very long time,'' you
can say, ``Copyright lasts a very long time.''

If you want to criticize copyright instead of supporting it, you can use
the term ``copyright restrictions.''

@item RAND (reasonable and non-discriminatory)
Standards bodies that promulgate patent-restricted standards that
prohibit free software typically have a policy of obtaining patent
licenses that require a fixed fee per copy of a conforming program. They
often refer to such licenses by the term ``RAND,'' which stands for
``reasonable and non-discriminatory.''

That term whitewashes a class of patent licenses that are normally
neither reasonable nor non-discriminatory. It is true that these
licenses do not discriminate against any specific person, but they do
discriminate against the free software community, and that makes them
unreasonable. Thus, half of ``RAND'' is deceptive and the other half is
prejudiced.

Standards bodies should recognize that these licenses are
discriminatory, and drop the use of the term ``reasonable and
non-discriminatory'' or ``RAND'' to describe them. Until they do so,
other writers who do not wish to join in the whitewashing would do well
to reject that term. To accept and use it merely because patent-wielding
companies have made it widespread is to let those companies dictate the
views you express.

I suggest the term ``uniform fee only,'' or ``UFO'' for short, as a
replacement. It is accurate because the only condition in these licenses
is a uniform royalty fee.

@item Sell software
The term ``sell software'' is ambiguous. Strictly speaking, exchanging a
copy of a free program for a sum of money is ``selling''; but people
usually associate the term ``sell'' with proprietary restrictions on the
subsequent use of the software. You can be more precise, and prevent
confusion, by saying either ``distributing copies of a program for a
fee'' or ``imposing proprietary restrictions on the use of a program,''
depending on what you mean.

See ``Selling Free Software'' for more discussion of this issue.

@item Theft
Copyright apologists often use words like ``stolen'' and ``theft'' to
describe copyright infringement. At the same time, they ask us to treat
the legal system as an authority on ethics: if copying is forbidden, it
must be wrong.

So it is pertinent to mention that the legal system---at least in the
U.S.---rejects the idea that copyright infringement is ``theft.'' Copyright
apologists are making an appeal to authority@dots{}and misrepresenting what
the authority says.

The idea that laws decide what is right or wrong is mistaken in
general. Laws are, at their best, an attempt to achieve justice; to say
that laws define justice or ethical conduct is turning things upside
down.

@end table
